contributing: review guidelines (#4000)
inveniosoftware/invenio: CONTRIBUTING.rst

maintainers to edit your pull request
<https://help.github.com/articles/allowing-changes-to-a-pull-request-branch-created-from-a-fork/>`_
so they can fix small issues autonomously.

.. rubric: Review guidelines

A pull request will probably be reviewed by someone in a different location,
maybe even a different time zone. Therefore, avoiding blockings and
misunderstandings is key. The following ideas could help ease and speed
up the review process:

> - Be clear when something is ready to reviewed (see `WIP` above).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Be clear when something is ready to be reviewed (see `WIP` above).
```

- If a PR requires changes, say so explicitly, but politely (use emojis!).

> - When something is ready to be merge say it explicitly. If the reviewer does

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When something is ready to be merged say it explicitly. If the reviewer does
```

> not have permission to merge, it should ping the corresponding person.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
not have permission to merge, they should ping the corresponding person.
```
:wink: 
This is the new gender neutral pronoun... which is actually quite interesting in French because no pronouns like it existed and it had to be invented in the last few years! ( "Ile" I think is the recommended one in French)

Author: Oh nice, so for future reference, is "they" not "it" even if the intention is for a user (singular, not plural)

Reviewer 2: Yes. In any case, "it" is for a singular *thing* in English, so we would have used "he or she" in the past (why the winking face :smile:  ), but now "they" is more appropriate... which is also interesting because using "they" like here used to be a grammatical mistake. "They" was solely considered plural, so using it to refer to a singular person was erroneous (but it was common slang, so it was a typical way to lose points in English classes!).

Reviewer: Minor: I would honestly go for `she/he` or `(s)he`, they sounds weird :)

Reviewer 2: minor: So... This can be a fraught topic and I am not necessarily the best champion for that cause... but "they" is now a [grammatically correct](https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/general_writing/grammar/pronouns/gendered_pronouns_and_singular_they.html) way to denote both "he or she" *and* non-binary subjects. Agreed, it does sound strange to use "they" when you are used to being prevented from saying it :)! If members of our community identify as such, it is not a big burden on us to use that pronoun to have that extra layer of inclusion. For me, it's just easier to use "they" than alternatives ;).

In any case, we have been approaching this in good faith and no matter the decision the choice was not meant to exclude. You can merge when you want.

> - When reviewing, rate your comments. This would help the other person know If

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When reviewing, rate your comments. This would help to understand if
```

a comment must be addressed (e.g. it has substantial implications) or it is
something the reviewer thought of but is a matter of "take it or leave it". A
proposed scale is:
  1. Comment/Shelved: Something worth mentioning, a doubt or question (comment).

>   If it will be treated later on as part of a different issue it is "shelved".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  If it will be treated later or as part of a different issue, it is "shelved".
```

Author: I actually meant:

- It will be treated later
- Or as part of a different issue.

But is not a good practice to do things without an issue. So the correction applies :) hehe

>   In case of shelving reference the issue.

Reviewer: Moderate: why not separating `comment` and `shelved` then? If I understand correctly, `comment` means potentially no action, but `shelved` means "fix it later and create an issue for that". If this is the case, I would split the 2 in different points because they require different actions.

Author: True, I have separated it and set in `5.`. As it was was actually not accurate, since we are shelving also other types of comments when agreed (being more flexible to progress faster).

  2. Minor: Something that the reviewer thinks might need change. However, it
  is not blocking, it is up to the developer to choose if and how to change
  it. It can be merged!

>   3. Moderate: Something that requires further discussion (e.g. breaking

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  3. Moderate/Normal (Default): Something that requires further discussion (e.g. breaking
```

The way I've approached it is to assume this is the level if no level or other indication is given (from the comments I read and the ones I give). I will add a little section about this below.

Author: Oh! I was actually assuming minor 😅 so yeah, better to put a default 👌

>   changes). It cannot be merged, unless explicitly said (e.g. choose a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  changes). It cannot be merged, unless explicitly stated by the reviewer (e.g. choose a
```
It is not clear to me said by who ;)

>   solution proposed by the reviewer and implement it).

Reviewer: Moderate: I am not sure this point is clear. It looks like that the reviewer proposed several different solutions, the creator of the PR then chooses one and then merge? After having implemented the chosen solution, I guess another review is required. Maybe I did not understand correctly.

Reviewer 2: The "choose a solution" is an example. Commonly, "moderate" means don't merge right away, engage with the review comment and see where that leads: sometimes a change is needed, sometimes the reviewer missed something and no changes is needed. In any case, a back and forth will occur, but the back and forth is usually short. For example:

- reviewer: I thought we wanted to require this field?
- submitter: `<checks up on the question>` Ah you're right! Let me fix that. <pushes changes> `<alerts reviewer>`
- reviewer: `<takes another look>` Thanks, all good! `<approves if no other outstanding issues>`

Author: Exactly. Maybe this is a "loose end" we might have done sometimes. There are changes that are trivial (e.g. add `requires=True` to a marshmallow schema) but it has an impact so the comment is "moderate". I guess in those cases what we have done is:
1- Comment the `moderate` change
2- State that it can be merged
3- PR creator does the change (trivial) and can merge

Ofc, in this case we are assuming PR creator/reviewer are both maintainers... Maybe we shouldnt?

>   4. Major: Needs discussion, probably a video call. Even the opinion of an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  4. Major: Needs more discussions, probably a chat. Even the opinion of an
```
or similar :)

Minor: what do you mean with the sentence "Even the opinion of an architect"? That you should involve one?

Author: Indeed, e.g. a change in `pidstore` base code or `invenio-records-rest` views.

>   architect. It has high implications. It cannot be merged.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  architect. It has high implications. It cannot be merged.
  
Here is an example:
  
    minor: I think this variable name should be plural since it refers to a list.
  
If no level is given, assume it is of "moderate" level within reason (might clearly be minor or major). GitHub suggestions for instance are typically minor, so no need to tag them all the time.

Following these guidelines builds trust over time. As a reviewer, you know your comments will be heard and as a submitter, you know someone has taken the time to go over your work and help you solve the problem you were tackling. In both cases, it's done in a friendly and efficient manner.  
```

maintainers to edit your pull request
<https://help.github.com/articles/allowing-changes-to-a-pull-request-branch-created-from-a-fork/>`_
so they can fix small issues autonomously.

.. rubric: Review guidelines

A pull request will probably be reviewed by someone in a different location,
maybe even a different time zone. Therefore, avoiding blockings and
misunderstandings is key. The following ideas could help ease and speed
up the review process:

- Be clear when something is ready to be reviewed (see `WIP` above).
- If a PR requires changes, say so explicitly, but politely (use emojis!).
- When something is ready to be merged say it explicitly. If the reviewer does
not have permission to merge, (s)he should ping the corresponding person.
- When reviewing, rate your comments. This would help to understand if
a comment must be addressed (e.g. it has substantial implications) or it is
something the reviewer thought of but is a matter of "take it or leave it". A
proposed scale is:

>   1. Comment: a change worth mentioning, a doubt or question (comment).

Reviewer 3: IMHO the categories 'Comment' and 'Minor' are currently very similar and could prove slightly confusing to pick between them.
The reasoning behind this would be that: the resulting action is the same since in both cases a change is proposed that is not necessary to be applied for the PR to be merged.
The solution for this could be to remove the option of suggesting a change through a Comment.
```suggestion
  1. Comment:  a doubt or question (comment).
```
In this case, this would mean that actually this is a 'Question' category as it serves solely to provide more information to the reviewer.
So then maybe it could look like:
```suggestion
  1. Question: a doubt or question (comment).
```
